# covid19_info

Optionally, users can also accept to share their device’s location data with the app, “with the purpose of guaranteeing the quality of the data and its epidemiological analysis,” as they explain on the app’s website. What the app does require users to do is to fill out a form with personal info, including a contact address where health authorities can reach the person if necessary. This ‘app’ has some similarities with Stop Covid19 Cat, offered in Catalonia. However, the latter requires users to consent to share their geolocation data, which allows authorities to gather information on how the pandemic is spreading throughout the region.

“These applications are chiefly intended to help prevent COVID support hotlines from collapsing and collecting certain socio-demographic data, such as user gender and age. And, while at it, they can also gather geolocation data from users’ devices, although, in principle, all this data is anonymized and aggregated,” says Murillo.

Detecting and isolating COVID-19 cases is a priority to slow down the spread of the pandemic. Specifically, the WHO has reiterated  that, besides finding, testing, isolating, and treating every positive case of COVID-19, it is vital to “trace all contacts” of individual positives with other people in order to curtail virus spread rates. Mobile technology offers a powerful tool to facilitate this task through ‘apps’ that collect user data. The cases of countries such as South Korea have clearly illustrated how effective they can be at the time of identifying and notifying citizens that may come into contact with infected individuals. However, in Europe, for the time being, and partly due to strict privacy regulations, models use more limited data.

How do these applications really work?, ere they breaching users’ privacy in any way?, and how effective are they really to control the coronavirus pandemic? To answer these and other questions, we contacted Juan Murillo, a member of the Data Strategy team at BBVA and an expert in the use of ‘big data’ for the greater good